---
layout: post
title: GSoC 2020 and KDE
tags: kde gsoc 2020
---

Tomorrow (29/06/2020) begins the first evaluation of the Google Summer of Code 2020.
Last GSoC, when I was participating as a student, I wrote in my 
[final report](https://community.kde.org/GSoC/2019/StatusReports/CaioTonetti) a set 
of future proposals that could be done in the ROCS graph IDE (Section *What's Next?*). 
This year, some students got interested in these ideas but only one could enter the 
program (we didn't have enough mentors for more than one project). Here are the list 
that I proposed:

* Implementation of a better algorithm to position the nodes and edges on the plane. 
I can recommend the use of Force-directed graph drawing algorithms, because they are 
usually fast and are physics-based; 
* Create a better interface workflow for the program. I can recommend something like 
the Possible New Configuration image. This configuration consider that the user will 
spend most part of the time programming, so it creates a better writing space, while 
the view has a more square shape, which is (in my opinion), better for visualization;
* Remodelation of how each graph is represented in the javascript code. The type 
system is good to provide a global configuration, but I think it falls apart when dealing 
with individual edges and dynamic creation of subgraphs and new edges/nodes (which is 
needed in some algorithms);
* Rewrite the view to deal with some problems related to the space of the graphs that 
is really limited, mouse clicks not working correctly and bad navigation;
* Change how the icons are used by the ROCS, as some icons don't have cross-compatibility 
between some systems.

From this list, Dilson decided to tackle the first one listed. Here is 
[his proposal](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/projects/#4532377939869696). Most 
of the best algorithms involves some type of heuristic inspired in physical motions in 
the graph, being really fast and good in most graph classes (although there is specialized 
algorithms for some graph classes).
You can see more of his work [here](https://dilsonguim.github.io/website/). He is doing 
a great job by showing a good understanding of the algorithms and methods while giving 
a great amount of thought in the test process (as it is not trivial to test random 
algorithms). 

For now, he implemented a layout algorithm that is an adaptation of the 
[Fruchtermani-Reingold algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Force-directed_graph_drawing) 
that works only on connected graphs in a special plugin that controls each physical 
forces inside the model. I will be giving some updates on his work sparsely in this blog. 
Please check his blog for more details if interested. :)

---
